here's an intriguing fact in the
developed world everywhere women live an
average of 6 to 8 years longer than men
do 6 to 8 years longer that's like a
huge gap in 2015 The Lancet published an
article showing that men in rich
countries are twice as likely to die as
women are at any age but there is one
place in the world where men live as
long as women
it's a remote mountainous zone a blue
zone where super longevity is common to
both sexes this is the blue zone in
Sardinia an Italian island in the
Mediterranean between Corsica and
Tunisia where there are six times as
many centenarians as on the Italian
mainland less than 200 miles away there
are 10 times as many centenarians as
there are in North America it's the only
place where men live as long as women
but why my curiosity was piqued I
decided to research the science in the
habits of the place and I started with
the genetic profile
I discovered soon enough that genes
accounts for just 25 percent of their
longevity the other 75% is lifestyle so
what does it take to live 200 or beyond
what are they doing right what you're
looking at is an aerial view of Villa
Grande it's a village at the epicenter
of the Blue Zone where I went to
investigate this and as you can see
architectural beauty is not its main
virtue density is tightly spaced houses
into rows and alleys and streets it
means that the villagers lives
constantly intersect and as I walk
through the village I could feel
hundreds of tears of eyes watching me
from behind doorways and curtains from
behind shutters because like all ancient
villages the
grande couldn't have survived without
this structure without its walls with I
miss cathedral without its Village
Square because defense and social
cohesion defined its design urban
priorities changed as we move towards
the Industrial Revolution because
infectious disease became the risk of
the day but what about now now social
isolation is the public health risk of
our time now a third of the population
says they have two or fewer people to
lean on but let's go to De La Grande now
as a contrast to meet some centenarians
meet Giuseppe Marino he's 102 a super
centenarian and a lifelong resident of
the village of Villa Grande he was a
gregarious man he loved to recount
stories such as how he lived like a bird
from what he could find on the forest
floor during not one but two world wars
how he and his wife who also lived past
100 raised six children and small homey
kitchen where I interviewed him here he
is with his friends Angelo and Domenico
both in their 70s and looking after
their father and who were quite frankly
very suspicious of me and my daughter
who came along with me on this research
trip because the flipside of social
cohesion is a wariness of strangers and
outsiders but CEO Giuseppe he wasn't he
wasn't suspicious at all he was a
happy-go-lucky guy very outgoing with a
positive outlook and I wondered so is
that what it takes to live to be 100 or
beyond thinking positively actually no
meet Giovanni Correa C's 101 the
grumpiest person I have ever met and he
put allied to the notion that you have
to be positive to live a long life and
there is evidence for this when I asked
him why he lived so long he kind of
looked at me under hooded eyelids and he
growled nobody has to know my secrets
but despite being a sourpuss the niece
who lived with him and looked after him
called him El Tesoro my treasure and she
respected him and loved him and she told
me when I questioned this obvious loss
of her freedom you just don't understand
do you looking after this man is a
pleasure it's a huge privilege for me
this is my heritage and indeed wherever
I went to interview these centenarians I
found a kitchen party
here's Giovanni with his two nieces
Maria above him and beside him his great
niece Sarah who came when I was there to
bring fresh fruits and vegetables and I
quickly discovered by being there but in
the blue zone as people age and indeed
across their lifespans they're always
surrounded by extended family by friends
by neighbors the priests the barkeeper
the grocer people are always there or
dropping by
they are never left to live solitary
lives this is unlike the rest of the
developed world whereas George Burns
Crypt happiness is having a large loving
caring family in another city now so far
we've only met men long living men but I
met women too and here you feed Zia
Teresa she over a hundred taught me how
to make the local specialty which is
called cooler Jonas which are these
large pasture pockets like ravioli about
this size besides and they're filled
with high fat ricotta and mint and
drenched in tomato sauce and she showed
me how to make just the right crimp so
they wouldn't open and she makes them
with her daughter's every Sunday and
distributes them by the
to neighbors and friends and that's when
I discovered a low-fat gluten-free diet
is not what it takes to live to 100 in
the blue zone now these centenarians
stories along with the science that
underpins them prompted me to ask myself
some questions - such as when am I going
to die and how can I put that day off
and as you will see the answer is not
what we expect Julian Holt once Ted is a
researcher at Brigham Young University
and she addressed this very question in
a series of studies of tens of thousands
of middle-aged people much like this
audience here and she looked at every
aspect of their lifestyle their diet
their exercise their marital status how
often they went to the doctor whether
they smoked or drank etc she recorded
all of this and then she and her
colleagues sat tight and waited for
seven years to see who would still be
breathing and of the people left
standing
what reduced their chances of dying the
most that was a question so let's now
look at her data in summary going from
the least powerful predictor to the
strongest okay
so clean air which is great it doesn't
predict how long you will live whether
you have your hypertension treated is
good still not a strong predictor
whether you're leaner overweight you can
stop feeling guilty about this because
it's only in third place how much
exercise you get is next still only a
moderate predictor whether you've had a
cardiac event and you're in rehab and
exercising getting higher now whether
you've had a flu vaccine did anybody
here know that having a flu vaccine
protects you more than doing exercise
whether you were drinking in quitter
whether you're moderate drinker whether
you don't smoke or if you did whether
you quit and getting towards the top
predictors are two features of your
social life
first your close relationships
these are the people that you can call
on for a loan if you need money suddenly
who will call the doctor if you're not
feeling well or who will take you to the
hospital or who will sit with you if
you're having an existential crisis if
you're in despair that those people that
little clutch of people are a strong
predictor if you have them of how long
you live and then something that's
surprisingly something that's called
social integration this means how much
you interact with people as you move
through your day how many people you
talk to and these mean both your weak
and your strong bonds so not just the
people you're really close to who mean a
lot to you but like do you talk to the
guy who everyday makes you your coffee
do you talk to the postman do you talk
to the woman who walks by your house
every day with her dog do you play
bridge or poker have a book club those
interactions are one of the strongest
predictors of how long you live now this
leads me to the next question if we now
spend more time online than on any other
activity including sleeping we're now up
to 11 hours a day one hour more than
last year by the way does it make a
difference
why distinguish between interacting
in-person and interacting via social
media is it the same thing as being
there if you're in contact constantly
with your kids through text for example
well the short answer to the question is
no it's not the same thing face-to-face
contact releases a whole cascade of
neurotransmitters and like a vaccine may
protect you now in the present and well
into the future
so simply making eye contact with
somebody shaking hands giving somebody a
high five is enough to release oxytocin
which increases your level of trust and
it lowers your cortisol levels so it
lowers your stress and dopamine is
generated which gives us a little high
and it kills pain it's like a
unnaturally produced morphine now all of
this passes under our conscious radar
which is why we
conflate online activity with the real
thing but we do have evidence now fresh
evidence that there is a difference so
let's look at some of the neuroscience
Elizabeth red Kay a neuroscientist at
the University of Maryland tried to map
the difference between what goes on in
our brains when we interact in person
versus when we're watching something
that's static and what she did is she
compared the brain function of two
groups of people those interacting live
with her or with one of her research
associates in a dynamic conversation and
she compared that to the brain activity
of people who are watching her talk
about the same subject but in a canned
video like on YouTube so and by the way
if you want to know how she fit two
people in an MRI scanner at the same
time talk to me later
so what's the difference this is your
brain on real social interaction what
you're seeing is the difference in brain
activity between interacting in person
and taking in static content in orange
you see the brain areas that are
associated with attention social
intelligence that means anticipating
with somebody else's thinking and
feeling and planning an emotional reward
and these areas become much more engaged
when we're interacting with a live
partner
now these richer brain signatures might
be why recruiters from fortune 500
companies evaluating candidates thought
that the candidates were smarter when
they heard their voices compared to when
I just read their pitches in a text for
example or an email or a letter now our
voices and body language convey a rich
signal it shows that we're thinking
feeling sentient human beings who are
much more than an algorithm now this
research by Nicholas F Lee at the
University of Chicago Business School is
quite amazing because it tells us a
simple thing if somebody hears your
voice they think you're smarter I mean
that's quite a simple thing now to
return to the beginning why do women
live longer than men and
a major reason is that women are more
likely to prioritize and groom their
face-to-face relationships over their
lifespans fresh evidence shows that
these in-person friendships create a
biological forcefield
against disease and decline and it's not
just true of humans but the primate
relations our primate relations as well
anthropologist Joan silks work shows
that female baboons who have a core of
female friends show lower levels of
stress via their cortisol levels they
live longer and they have more surviving
offspring at least three stable
relationships that was the magic number
think about it I hope you guys have
three the power of such face-to-face
contact is really why there are the
lowest rates of dementia among people
who are socially engaged it's why women
who have breast cancer are four times
more likely to survive their disease
than loners are why men have had a
stroke who meet regularly to play poker
or to have coffee er to play old-timers
hockey I'm Canadian after all are better
protected by that social contact than
they are by medication why men you've
had a stroke we meet regularly this is
something very powerful they can do this
face-to-face contact provides stunning
benefits yet now almost a quarter of the
population says they have no one to talk
to we can do something about this like
Sardinian villagers it's a biological
imperative to know we belong and not
just the women among us building
in-person interaction into our cities
into our workplaces into our agendas
bolsters the immune system since
feel-good hormones surging through the
bloodstream and brain and helps us live
longer I call this building your village
and building it and sustaining it is a
matter of life and death thank
come back I have a question for you and
wondering if there's a middle path so
you talked about the neurotransmitters
connecting when in face to face but what
about digital technology that we've seen
enormous improvements in digital
technology like FaceTime you know things
like that does that work too I mean I
see my nephew he plays minecraft and
he's yelling and his friends it seems
like he's connecting pretty well because
that is that useful is that helpful you
know some of the data are just emerging
the data is so fresh that the digital
revolution happened and a health data
trailed behind so we're just learning
but I would say that some improvements
that we can make in the technology for
example the camera on your laptop is at
the top of the screen so for example
when you're looking into the screen
you're not actually making eye contact
so something as simple as even just
looking into the camera can increase
those neurotransmitters or maybe
changing the position of the camera so
it's not identical but I think we are
getting closer with the technology right
thank you so much thank you